Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure AuthorizedINTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET APPRAISAL STAGE I. Basic Information Date prepared/updated: 04/30/2010 Report No.: 54389 1. Basic Project Data Country: Cote d’Ivoire Project ID: P120810 Project Name: Emergency Urban Infrastructure Project (Additional Financing) Task Team Leader: Yao Badjo Estimated Appraisal Date: May 5, 2010 Estimated Board Date: June 15, 2010 Managing Unit: AFTUW Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery Loan Sector: Roads and highways (43%);Sanitation (23%);Water supply (21%);Solid waste management (13%) Theme: Access to urban services and housing (57%);Other urban development (43%) IBRD Amount (US$m.): 0.00 IDA Amount (US$m.): 50.00 GEF Amount (US$m.): 0.00 PCF Amount (US$m.): 0.00 Other financing amounts by source: BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00 0.00 Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment Simplified Processing Simple [] Repeater [] Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) Yes [X] No [ ] 2. Project Objectives The Project Development Objective of the Additional Financing of the Emergency Infrastructure Project (aimed to increase access and improve the quality of urban infrastructure and services in the country’s two largest cities, Abidjan and Bouaké. The achievement of this objective would support the Government of Côte d'Ivoire's efforts to demonstrate concrete improvements in the lives of its citizens, a critical step for sustaining social and political stability in the country. 3. Project Description Four out of the five initial components will be scaled up to strengthen project sustainability and increase the number of people having access to services. The fifth component (urban contracts) does not require additional funds. The proposed Additional Financing will contribute to mitigating the impact of the crisis on the poor. The description below provides a summary of activities in each component as well as highlights how it contributes to the protection of core expenditure programs. Project components: Urban Water Services (US$12 million): The Additional Financing will allow Government to: (i) protect fresh water resources in Abidjan and Bonoua that are threatened by pollution and; (ii) increase water production through water facilities rehabilitation/extension. This measure will significantly improve water service provision in very poor neighborhoods of Abidjan, Bouaké, Korhogo and smaller cities, where the population has no access to safe water. Sanitation (US$12 million): The additional financing will support the restoration of the deteriorated environmental condition of the Abidjan lagoon and low-lying areas, particularly the Indénié and Cocody bays, which constitute serious health hazards for the population. Solid Waste Collection and Disposal (US$7 million): The funds will be used to rehabilitate the solid waste collection infrastructure, which will allow resumption of operations at the transfer station and storage of waste and its removal to the landfill site. This component will: (i) generate an estimated 7,000 jobs in the sector; (ii) improve significantly the environment and living condition for the Abidjan population, through reduction of endemic diseases such as malaria, typhoid fever, with repercussions on household income and productivity; and (iii) indirectly contribute to jump start economic activities. Urban roads rehabilitation (US$19 million): Despite considerable efforts under the current IDA Grant, there are still great needs to rehabilitate heavily dilapidated road pavement and to reinforce rainwater drainage systems in the urban centers. The component will consist in the rehabilitation of mass transit routes road in Abidjan and in selected urban centers. Around Abidjan, the seriously disadvantaged municipalities of Abobo, Yopougon and Cocody are no longer served by public transportation due to road degradation. Key results are expected to include improved and lower cost collective transportation in the disadvantaged neighborhoods, which are currently isolated from businesses and job opportunities. 4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis Project locations will include Abidjan (in particular Abobo, Yopougon and Cocody), Bonoua, Bouake, Korhogo, and in some selected cities including Indenie and Cocody bays. 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists Ms Salamata Bal (AFTCS) Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN) 6. Safeguard Policies Triggered Yes No Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) X Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) X Forests (OP/BP 4.36) X Pest Management (OP 4.09) X Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) X Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) X Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) X Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) X Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50) X Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) X II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: The Additional Financing, like the parent project is categorized as B indicating that environmental impacts are expected to be minimal, site-specific and manageable at an acceptable level. The types of investments included in the Additional financing are covered by the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) prepared and disclosed in-country and at the Infoshop on December 30, 2008, prior to the appraisal of the original project. The borrower will prepare ESIAs/EMP and RAPs as and when necessary during implementation, and these will be disclosed prior to commencement of civil works. 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: Indirect and long term impacts in the project areas or activities are not anticipated. 3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. Project alternatives to help avoid or minimize potential adverse impacts were not considered, as the parent and this additional project is designed to respond to emergency needs of the population during this post-crisis phase. 4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. The capacity of the borrower to address safeguard issues is considered adequate. The Project PIU has an Environmental Specialist who has been following up environmental and social issues during project implementation. To date, about three ESIA and 3 RAPs have been prepared, under the ongoing project; one has been disclosed and the remaining two are in the process of being disclosed. The existing arrangements for safeguards will continue under the Additional Financing. 5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. Key stakeholders still remain the following: MACOM (Support Mission for the Conduct of Municipal Operations/Mission d’Appui a la Conduite d’Operations Municipales); Ministry of Urban Affairs and Sanitation; Ministry of Economy and Finance; Municipalities of Abidjan, Bouake, and Korhogo; AGEROUTE (Agence Nationale de la Salubrite Urbaine); disadvantaged areas of Abobo, Yopougon and Cocody; Association of Mayors; Ministry of Economic Infrastructure and Sanitation division of Ministry of Construction and Urban Planning. All stakeholders will be consulted regularly as presently done. B. Disclosure Requirements Date Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? N/A Date of receipt by the Bank 12/30/2008 Date of "in-country" disclosure 12/30/2008 Date of submission to InfoShop 12/30/2008 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? N/A Date of receipt by the Bank 12/30/2008 Date of "in-country" disclosure 12/30/2008 Date of submission to InfoShop 12/30/2008 Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? Date of receipt by the Bank Date of "in-country" disclosure Date of submission to InfoShop Pest Management Plan: Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? Date of receipt by the Bank Date of "in-country" disclosure Date of submission to InfoShop * If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) Yes review and approve the EA report? Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the Yes credit/loan? OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process Yes framework (as appropriate) been prepared? If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Yes Manager review the plan? The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s Yes Infoshop? Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a Yes form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs? All Safeguard Policies Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities Yes been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies? Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project Yes cost? Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the Yes monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the Yes borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents? D. Approvals Signed and submitted by: Name Date Task Team Leader: Mr Yao Badjo 04/28/2010 Environmental Specialist: Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba 04/28/2010 Social Development Specialist Ms Salamata Bal 04/28/2010 Additional Environmental and/or Social Development Specialist(s): 04/28/2010 Approved by: Sector Manager: Mr Junaid Kamal Ahmad 04/28/2010 Comments: RSA has reviewed and cleared this first Additional Financing, PAD-ISDS for disclosure on April 29,2010. SMU has agreed to accept transfer of safeguards responsibilities. Parent project ID: P110020 