Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure AuthorizedPROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) CONCEPT STAGE Report No.: 54391 Project Name Emergency Urban Infrastructure Project (Additional Financing) Region AFRICA Sector Roads and highways (43%);Sanitation (23%);Water supply (21%);Solid waste management (13%) Project ID P120810 Borrower(s) REPUBLIC OF COTE D’IVOIRE Implementing Agency Ministry of Economic Infrastructures Environment Category [ ] A [X] B [ ] C [ ] FI [ ] TBD (to be determined) Date PID Prepared April 20, 2010 Estimated Date of Appraisal Authorization May 5, 2010 Estimated Date of Board Approval June 15, 2010 1. Key development issues and rationale for Bank involvement Country context. Côte d’Ivoire, the second largest economy in the West African sub-region, was for many years a beacon of peace and political stability with extraordinary per capita growth, dynamism, and political stability. Following four decades of stability and relative prosperity, Côte d’Ivoire experienced military and political conflict in September 2002, which subsequently split the country into two zones, one controlled by the Government and the other by the Forces Nouvelles (FN). This disrupted the administration and the health system in the Central, Northern and Western (CNW) of the country. One of the consequences of the conflict and division in the country has been an exodus of people. Most of the flow has been to urban centers, notably in the south, in search of stability and economic opportunities. As a result, urban poverty and overcrowding has dramatically increased, including in the two largest cities of the country Abidjan and Bouaké, where nearly half of the population of 20 million resides today. Helping the Government to ensure the delivery of basic infrastructure and social services to urban populations living in difficult and unsanitary conditions, and expanding these services to more people in Abidjan and other cities, notably in the CNW, is a key part of the Bank’s strategy to support crisis recovery and sustainable peace and development. The original grant: In May 2008, the Board of Directors of the World Bank approved a grant for an Emergency Urban Infrastructure Project for an amount of US$94 million equivalent, processed under the streamlined procedures of Operations Policy 8.00 Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies. This grant constituted a key pillar of the reengagement strategy. The financing was urgently required due to: (a) lack of maintenance and new investments which had considerably hampered the delivery of basic municipal services; and (b) dramatic increase in urbanization, largely compounded by crisis-led population displacement contributing to increased pressure on existing infrastructure and services. 1. Country macro-economic situation. The global economic recession is delaying Côte d’Ivoire’s economic recovery from a 10-year politico-military crisis. The economic rebound that was expected to help finance many of the crisis recovery expenditures, including reconstruction and basic services, has been dampened by the effect of the global recession and the delayed elections which have stalled new domestic and foreign investments. Foreign direct investment has fallen from a projected level of US$480 million to an estimated US$400 million in 2009, and projections for 2010 are also lower. GDP growth was initially projected to reach 4.4% in 2009 and 5.1% in 2010 but the actual rate for 2009 is now estimated at only 3.7% and growth is expected to fall to 3.0% in 2010. This is far below what is normally expected from an economy rebounding from a crisis, and much less than what is needed to reverse poverty trends. The global crisis has also reduced exports of refined oil products to the sub-region. The fall in global demand for refined oil has squeezed refining margins worldwide and the national oil refinery is unable to compete with larger overseas refineries that have drastically cut their profit margins in order to maintain sales. This is reducing revenue to the Government from taxes and dividends, creating arrears with suppliers to the refinery, and even threatening its capacity to supply gasoline to the national market. For this and other reasons, fiscal revenues fell short of IMF program targets by US$50 million in 2009. The shortfall would have been greater except for prudent fiscal policies and a freeze on discretionary spending in the last two months of 2009. Pre-existing needs. After 10 years of political turmoil and civil strife, the state faces major demands to restore basic social services and physical infrastructure, as well as to demobilize and reintegrate ex-combatants. Some 25% of primary school age children do not attend school, and many rural areas are inaccessible during the rainy season due to the deterioration of rural roads. The GDP fell by 15% and poverty has risen dramatically from 34% in 1998 to 49% in 2008. Due to the enormous recovery needs, and despite some assistance from donors, the government has only been able to partially meet the demands for basic services and post-crisis recovery programs. 2. Proposed objective(s) The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Additional Financing remains the same as that of the original project, i.e. increase access to and improve the quality of urban infrastructure and services in the country’s two largest cities, Abidjan and Bouaké. The achievement of this objective would support the Government of Côte d’Ivoire’s efforts to demonstrate concrete improvements in the lives of its citizens, a critical step for sustaining social and political stability in the country. 3. Preliminary description Four out of the five initial components will be scaled up to strengthen project sustainability and increase the number of people having access to services. The fifth component (urban contracts) does not require additional funds. The proposed Additional Financing will contribute to mitigating the impact of the crisis on the poor. The description below provides a summary of activities in each component as well as highlights how it contributes to the protection of core expenditure programs. Project components: Urban Water Services (US$12 million): The Additional Financing will allow Government to: (i) protect fresh water resources in Abidjan and Bonoua that are threatened by pollution and; (ii) increase water production through water facilities rehabilitation/extension. This measure will significantly improve water service provision in very poor neighborhoods of Abidjan, Bouaké, Korhogo and smaller cities, where the population has no access to safe water. Sanitation (US$12 million): The additional financing will support the restoration of the deteriorated environmental condition of the Abidjan lagoon and low-lying areas, particularly the Indénié and Cocody bays, which constitute serious health hazards for the population. Solid Waste Collection and Disposal (US$7 million): The funds will be used to rehabilitate the solid waste collection infrastructure, which will allow resumption of operations at the transfer station and storage of waste and its removal to the landfill site. This component will: (i) generate an estimated 7,000 jobs in the sector; (ii) improve significantly the environment and living condition for the Abidjan population, through reduction of endemic diseases such as malaria, typhoid fever, with repercussions on household income and productivity; and (iii) indirectly contribute to jump start economic activities. Urban roads rehabilitation (US$19 million): Despite considerable efforts under the current IDA Grant, there are still great needs to rehabilitate heavily dilapidated road pavement and to reinforce rainwater drainage systems in the urban centers. The component will consist in the rehabilitation of mass transit routes road in Abidjan and in selected urban centers. Around Abidjan, the seriously disadvantaged municipalities of Abobo, Yopougon and Cocody are no longer served by public transportation due to road degradation. Key results are expected to include improved and lower cost collective transportation in the disadvantaged neighborhoods, which are currently isolated from businesses and job opportunities. 4. Safeguard policies that might apply The Additional Financing, like the parent project is categorized as B indicating that environmental impacts are expected to be minimal, site-specific and manageable at an acceptable level. The types of investments included in the Additional financing are covered by the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) prepared and disclosed in-country and at the Infoshop on December 30, 2008, prior to the appraisal of the original project. The borrower will prepare ESIAs/EMP and RAPs as and when necessary during implementation, and these will be disclosed prior to commencement of civil works. 5. Tentative financing Source: ($m.) BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0 IDA Grant 50 Total 50 6. Contact point Contact: Yao Badjo Title: Senior Infrastructure Specialist Tel: (202) 473-3315 Fax: (202) 473-8249 Email: Ybadjo@worldbank.org 